1How to Read a Scientific Article
Mary Purugganan, Ph.D.     maryp@rice.edu
Jan Hewitt, Ph.D.    jhewitt@rice.edu
Cain Project in Engineering and Professional Communication
Reading a scientific article is a complex task.  The worst way to approach this task is to
treat it like the reading of a textbook¡ªreading from title to literature cited, digesting
every word along the way without any reflection or criticism.  Rather, you should begin
by skimming the article to identify its structure and features.  As you read, look for the
author¡¯s main points.  Generate questions before, during, and after reading.  Draw
inferences based on your own experiences and knowledge.  And to really improve
understanding and recall, take notes as you read.   This handout discusses each of these
strategies in more detail.
1.  Skim the article and identify its structure.
Most journals use a conventional IMRD structure:  An abstract followed by Introduction,
Methods, Results, and Discussion.  Each of these sections normally contains easily
recognized conventional features, and if you read with an anticipation of these features,
you will read an article more quickly and comprehend more.
Features of Abstracts
Abstracts usually contain four kinds of information:
? purpose or rationale of study (why they did it)
? methodology (how they did it)
? results (what they found)
? conclusion (what it means)
Most scientists read the abstract first.  Others¡ªespecially experts in the field¡ªskip right
from the title to the visuals because the visuals, in many cases, tell the reader what kinds
of experiments were done and what results were obtained.  You should probably begin
reading a paper by reading the abstract carefully and noting the four kinds of information
outlined above.   Then move first to the visuals and then to the rest of the paper.
Features of Introductions
Introductions serve two purposes:  creating readers¡¯ interest in the subject and providing
them with enough information to understand the article.  Generally, introductions
accomplish this by leading readers from broad information (what is known about the
topic) to more specific information (what is not known) to a focal point (what question
the authors asked and answered).  Thus, authors describe previous work that led to
current understanding of the topic (the broad) and then situate their work (the specific)
within the field.
2Features of Methods
The Methods section tells the reader what experiments were done to answer the question
stated in the Introduction.  Methods are often difficult to read, especially for graduate
students, because of technical language and a level of detail sufficient for another trained
scientist to repeat the experiments.  However, you can more fully understand the design
of the experiments and evaluate their validity by reading the Methods section carefully.
Features of Results and Discussion
The Results section contains results¡ªstatements of what was found, and reference to the
data shown in visuals (figures and tables).  Normally, authors do not include information
that would need to be referenced, such as comparison to others¡¯ results.  Instead, that
material is placed in the Discussion¡ªplacing the work in context of the broader field.
The Discussion also functions to provide a clear answer to the question posed in the
Introduction and to explain how the results support that conclusion.
Atypical Structure
Some articles you read will deviate from the conventional content of IMRD sections.  For
instance, Letters to Nature appear to begin with an abstract, followed by the body of the
article.  Upon reading, however, you will see that the ¡°abstract¡± is a summary of the work
filled with extensive introduction (for the purpose of catching the attention of a wide
audience), and the next paragraph begins a description of the experiments.
Therefore, when you begin to read an article for the first time, skim the article to analyze
the document as a whole.  Are the sections labeled with headings that identify the
structure?  If not, note what the structure is.  Decide which sections contain the material
most essential to your understanding of the article.   Then decide the order in which you
will read the sections.
2.  Distinguish main points.
Because articles contain so much information, it may be difficult to distinguish the main
points of an article from the subordinate points.  Fortunately, there are many indicators of
the author¡¯s main points:
Document level
? Title
? Abstract
? Keywords
? visuals (especially figure and
table titles)
? first sentence or the last 1-2
sentences of the Introduction
Paragraph level:  words or phrases to look for
? surprising
? unexpected
? in contrast with previous work
? has seldom been addressed
3? we hypothesize that
? we propose
? we introduce
? we develop
? the data suggest
3. Generate questions and be aware of your understanding
Reading is an active task.  Before and during your reading, ask yourself these questions:
? Who are these authors?  What journal is this?  Might I question the credibility of
the work?
? Have I taken the time to understand all the terminology?
? Have I gone back to read an article or review that would help me understand this
work better?
? Am I spending too much time reading the less important parts of this article?
? Is there someone I can talk to about confusing parts of this article?
After reading, ask yourself these questions:
? What specific problem does this research address?  Why is it important?
? Is the method used a good one?  The best one?
? What are the specific findings?  Am I able to summarize them in one or two
sentences?
? Are the findings supported by persuasive evidence?
? Is there an alternative interpretation of the data that the author did not address?
? How are the findings unique/new/unusual or supportive of other work in the field?
? How do these results relate to the work I¡¯m interested in?  To other work I¡¯ve read
about?
? What are some of the specific applications of the ideas presented here?  What are
some further experiments that would answer remaining questions?
4. Draw inferences.
Not everything that you learn from an article is stated explicitly.  As you read, rely on
your prior knowledge and world experience, as well as the background provided in the
article, to draw inferences from the material.  Research has shown that readers who
actively draw inferences are better able to understand and recall information.
As an example, in the box below is an excerpt from the Introduction of an article in the
journal Biochemistry (Ballestar et al., 2000).  The comments in italics are questions and
inferences that might be drawn by a student reader.
Rett Syndrome is a childhood neurodevelopmental disorder and one of the most common
causes of mental retardation in females Comment:  Hmmm¡­must be related to a gene on
the X-chromosome, with an incidence of 1 in 10000-15000.  Comment:  How common is
that?  Not too likely to happen to me, but there must be several such children born in
Houston every year.  Rett syndrome patients are characterized by a period of normal
growth and development (6-18 months) followed by regression with loss of speech and
purposeful hand use.  Comment:  What happens?  Something must be triggered or
activated at late infancy.  Patients also develop seizures, autism, and ataxia.  After initial
4regression, the condition stabilizes and patients survive into adulthood.  Studies of
familial cases provided evidence that Rett is caused by X-linked dominant mutations in a
gene subject to X-chromosome inactivation.  Recently, a number of mutations in the gene
encoding the methyl-CpG binding transcriptional repressor MeCP2 have been associated
with Rett Syndrome.  Comment: MeCP2 mutations probably cause Rett Syndrome.  This
must be an important master-regulator to affect so many processes in the brain.  I
wonder what they know about it¡­
5.  Take notes as you read.
Effective readers take notes¡ªit improves recall and comprehension. You may think
you¡¯ll remember everything you read in researching class assignments, professional
papers, proposals, or your thesis, but details will slip away.  Develop a template for
recording notes on articles you read, or adapt the template below for use.  As you
accumulate a large collection of articles, this template will help you distinguish articles
and quickly locate the correct reference for your own writing. The time spent filling out
the form will save you hours of rereading when you write a Background, Related Work,
or a Literature Review section.
Template for Taking Notes on Research Articles:
Easy access for later use
Whenever you read an article, pertinent book chapter, or research on the web, use the
following format (or something similar) to make an electronic record of your notes for
later easy access. Put quotation marks around any exact wording you write down so that
you can avoid accidental plagiarism when you later cite the article.
Complete citation.  Author(s), Date of publication, Title (book or article), Journal,
Volume #, Issue #, pages:
If web access:  url; date accessed
Key Words:
General subject:
Specific subject:
5Hypothesis:
Methodology:
Result(s):
Summary of key points:
Context (how this article relates to other work in the field; how it ties in with key issues
and findings by others, including yourself):
Significance (to the field; in relation to your own work):
Important Figures and/or Tables (brief description; page number):
6Cited References to follow up on (cite those obviously related to your topic AND any
papers frequently cited by others because those works may well prove to be essential as
you develop your own work):
Other Comments:
References
Ballestar, E., Yusufzai, T.M., and Wolffe, A.P.  (2000) Effects of Rett Syndrome
Mutations of the Methyl-CpG Binding Domain of the Transcriptional Repressor MeCP2
on Selectivity for Association with Methylated DNA.  Biochemistry 31, 7100-7106.
Burnett, R. (2001) Technical Communication. 5th ed. San Antonio: Harcourt College
Publishers.
Zeiger, M. (2000) Essentials of Writing Biomedical Research Papers. 2nd Ed. St. Louis:
McGraw-Hill.
Supported by the Cain Project for Engineering and Professional Communication
Rice University, 2004
